---
layout: post
title: "What I learned from playing chess"
subtitle: ""
thumbnail-img: https://i.pinimg.com/originals/91/22/1f/91221ff9396b1c8633dfc33500ecc549.jpg
share-img: https://i.pinimg.com/originals/91/22/1f/91221ff9396b1c8633dfc33500ecc549.jpg
tags: [advice, chess]
---

I used to play a lot of chess. Actually, I reached a peak rating of 2180 USCF in high school, but then decided that spending time on math and music felt more rewarding. Although I don't play much chess nowadays, the process of improving taught me several life lessons which I still find valuable. (Of course, I think people can learn them from pursuing excellence in other activities, too.) Here are a few which come to mind.

## Learn from your mistakes
My grandfather used to coach the Chinese national chess team, and when he came to visit he would challenge me to some games. Obviously I lost every single game. At first, the experience of getting crushed 100 games in a row was so traumatizing for my 9-year-old self that I fled into my room and cried. But eventually, I decided that I really wanted to win against him someday, and that meant I had a lot of studying to do.

In retrospect, this was the best possible way to improve: play someone much better than you, lose, and learn from my mistakes. Chess taught me to acknowledge my weaknesses. There are clear rules, everyone starts with the same resources, there's no random chance, and there's a winner and a loser. When I lost, it was entirely my fault, so I had to figure out where I messed up. And besides, when I mess up, I might as well get something positive out of the experience. "Never play a game without analyzing it afterward -- otherwise, you're just wasting your time," the grown-ups told me.

My incredibly long losing streak also taught me one meaning of the proverb, "experience is the best teacher." Mistakes are painful, so making them is a great way to remember and avoid them in the future. Seeing other people get wiped out by a [windmill attack](https://www.chess.com/terms/windmill-chess) isn't nearly as effective as experiencing the destruction yourself...

Much of what I've said here applies to improving and learning at other activities too, so I won't go into much further detail. The academic literature says plenty about the concepts of "grit," "growth mindset," and "deliberate practice," and I might write more about them in the future. Right now, I'll write about something more specific to chess.

## Stay objective
For a long time, I came to every chess game asking myself, "how can I win?" I believed that, if I was clever and persistent enough, I could find the resources to break through the enemy defenses and win the game. If a position was extremely complicated, and there were many lines to calculate, I had to check all the temptingly beautiful sacrifices, and I was often disappointed to realize they didn't work.

While an optimistic attitude works wonders sometimes, it isn't rooted in objective truth. As I climbed higher and higher up the rating ladder, people made fewer mistakes. Eventually I realized that nobody can win with perfect play, so I shouldn't expect to win. I shouldn't ask myself "how can I win?" but rather "how can I find a good move?" regardless of whether that move leads to a win. I started focusing on the process rather than speculating about results.

This insight might sound trivial, but it improved my chess dramatically (200 ELO points). I became more aware of possible dangers, so I learned to avoid creating weaknesses. Instead of looking at shiny sacrifices that didn't work, I learned to content myself with making small improvements to my position. Crucially, I started thinking more about chess as a science rather than an art. I learned to carefully analyze a position and select the plan that seemed objectively most promising.

I think this lesson applies to life more generally. When making decisions, it's a good idea to begin by gathering information and assessing what's possible. Keeping realistic expectations (while seizing opportunities that arise) can help avoid unnecessary risk and disappointment.

## Adapt to changes
Popular chess books often say things like, "here Alekhine made a deep positional plan that he carried out for the next 40 moves." This almost never happens, because chess games are simply too complicated. You can't really predict what other people are going to do, especially if you're playing a zero-sum game and they're trying their best to make your life miserable.

In reality, Alekhine probably set a short-term plan which was difficult to derail (something like, "let's move this knight to a threatening outpost within 5 turns"). His opponent might have responded in various ways, each with different drawbacks. Alekhine then exploited whichever concession the opponent decided was the lesser evil. This iterative process of short-term planning and reassessment creates a dialogue between the two players, gradually leading the game to its logical conclusion. An observer, impressed by how one decision led naturally to the next, might come away with the illusion of a "grand plan" envisioned from the beginning, when really the game could have diverged in a thousand different ways. Alekhine did not worry about all those other possibilities; he simply focused on how to find good moves in the position on his board.

Real life is much more complicated than chess games. Interests change, friendships fade, disasters strike (the recent pandemics, for instance). A soulmate might randomly waltz into your world. The universe is crazy and chaotic and unpredictable, and the flap of a butterfly's wings can change the trajectory of human history. It's pointless to make plans too far into the future, because they will quickly become obsolete. Instead, I try to make only short-term plans, and leave options open so that I can quickly adapt to changes that appear on the horizon.
