---
layout: post
title: "Success, productivity, and fun"
subtitle: "This is a disorganized ramble"
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/hourglass.png
share-img: /assets/img/hourglass.png
tags: [advice]
---
When browsing Coursera earlier, I rediscovered a course titled "The science of success: what researchers know you should know." Apparently I had started it several years ago, but then forgot about it. Still, success sounds nice, so I decided that I might as well glance at it in case there was any useful advice.

Upon skimming the whole thing, the course mostly talked about concepts I was already familiar with. The lectures spent much time explaining why growth mindset, grit, deliberate practice, and friendships are helpful for successfully achieving your goals, whatever they may be. Since people want different things in life, the lectures briefly defined "success" as the ability to do what you want, and then spent the rest of the time discussing general tips that may be helpful.

Unfortunately for me, defining success is the trickiest part of all. "What *do* I want to do with my life?" At this point I don't really know, though I do have some vague ideas floating around. First of all, I want to be kind to those around me, but that falls more under personal life, and probably wasn't the point of the discussion. If we're talking about work, I would like to make the world a better place, whatever that means. I enjoy creativity, challenges, and technology, so ideally I'd work on something that requires those things. Since software can involve new technologies, and it's used pretty widely, it can open a lot of doors... but I still shouldn't expect everything to turn out perfectly. There are always some compromises to make, and at this point I don't know enough about what I value in order to make them properly.

Another difficulty is that there are so many things I could be doing, even within math and computer science, that I'm not sure where to start. Maybe I should try doing more things, even if I end up not being particularly good at them. While some people seem obsessively fascinated with one topic (Ramanujan famously failed his other exams because he spent all his time discovering new math), I find that concentrating too much on one area feels exhausting. It's more efficient to rotate between two, so that I can make decent progress on both without going stressing myself out.

Lately I've started feeling an overwhelming need to be "productive" to the point that I can't even have fun anymore. So I guess this post is a reminder to keep my priorities straight. There's nothing wrong with taking a break once in a while and doing things for my own enjoyment, even if that activity doesn't have anything to do with computers.

Here's a list of "productive" people with their various activities and interests. 

- Aristotle (ethicist, physicist, botanist, logician, and much more)
- Leonardo da Vinci (engineer, scientist, artist)
- Antonio Vivaldi (priest, composer, violinist)
- Pierre de Fermat (lawyer, mathematician)
- Issac Newton (mathematician, physicist, theologian, treasurer, alchemist)
- Gottfried Leibniz (mathematician, philosopher, lawyer, diplomat, librarian)
- Blaise Pascal (mathematician, physicist, theologian)
- Benjamin Franklin (politician, scientist, businessman)
- Alexander Borodin (chemist, composer)
- Baruch Spinoza (glassmaker, philosopher)
- Max Euwe (mathematician, chessplayer)
- Friedrich Nietzsche (philologist, philosopher, poet, composer)
- Mikhail Botvinnik (electrical engineer, chessplayer)
- Mark Taimanov (chessplayer, pianist)
- Ramon y Cajal (artist, neuroscientist)
- Albert Einstein (patent clerk, physicist, violinist)
- John von Neumann (mathematician and scientist, very good at history and nearly everything else he put his mind to)
- Anna Kiesenhofer (mathematician, cyclist)
- Hedy Lamarr (actress, inventor)

Some of them only had one hobby outside of work, but I think it's important to remember that they still pursued activities which they considered unproductive. For instance, Nietzsche was disappointed that he became a "lowly" philosopher rather than a composer like Wagner. Conversely, sometimes their more reasonable interests seem unproductive in hindsight. After all, Newton infamously pursued alchemy, which was respectable back then, but which we now find silly. Trying to find a universal mathematical description for physics was a far crazier idea, and he was lucky that classical mechanics actually worked!

Unfortunately, it appears that making substantiative contributions to many different fields was much easier several centuries ago, when there was more low-hanging fruit and the distinction between different topics were blurred. For example, the first scientists were philosophers, as there was not yet enough specialized knowledge to require distinguishing "natural philosophy" from other branches such as metaphysics. But alas, the world has changed. Nowadays, if you want to do groundbreaking physics research, you probably need a million-dollar particle accelerator.

I'm not sure what the point of this post is. Well, I initially wanted to remember the things that help people succeed. But mostly, I ended up reminding myself to not take everything so seriously. I don't expect myself to be nearly as productive as all these famous people, but they found still time to have fun, so why shouldn't I? I can be a good software engineer *and* manage to do other things, as long as I get my work done.
