---
layout: post
title: "Some facts about C++"
thumbnail-img: 
share-img: 
tags: [programming]
---

It seems like most of the cool mathy projects in the tech world require C++ experience, and interviewers like to assess C++ knowledge by quizzing candidates on trivia. I don't like trivia questions because the answers are all things you could very easily look up online, and they don't have much to do with one's ability to write in that language. But since companies seem to insist on asking them anyway, I guess I have to play their game.

So here are some of the questions I've stumbled across in the wild so far. As usual, GeeksforGreeks and W3Schools answer these questions in much greater detail; I'm just taking notes here to refresh my memory.

- *What's the difference between a pointer and a reference?*
    
    Both are ways to access a variable. A pointer stores the memory address of the variable, while a reference is another name for the same variable (an alias). Pointers can be reassigned to a different memory address, while references cannot. As such, references are mostly used to pass arguments into a function.

- *What is the size of a pointer?*

    A pointer stores a memory address, so its size is simply the length of the address. This depends on your computer; on a 32-bit processor, it will simply take 32 bits.

- *When would you want to write a custom copy constructor or destructor?* 

    Constructors are the functions we call to construct objects. You've probably seen them before -- they can be empty, or sometimes you might need to pass them arguments. A copy constructor is a special kind of constructor that creates an object by copying an existing one.

    By default, the C++ copy constructor makes a shallow copy -- when it creates a new object, the object's member variables refer to the same memory as the object that was copied. Hence, changing the underlying members in memory will change *both* objects. To make a deep copy, we need to write a custom constructor.

    Destructors are functions that destroy objects after we're done using them, freeing memory. There can only ever be one destructor in a class, for obvious reasons. The destructor is called automatically when the object goes out of scope. While C++ supplies a default destructor, we might need to write a custom destructor if the class dynamically allocates memory or contains pointers that we need to delete. 

- *What are (pure) virtual functions?*

    A virtual function is a function defined in a parent class and overridden by a child class. A pure virtual function must be overridden (it's left unimplemented in the parent class).

- *What is a memory leak?*

    A memory leak happens when we allocate memory for objects and don't deallocate them when finished. This causes the computer to slowly run out of free memory. 

- *What is the difference between static and dynamic memory allocation?* 

    When creating objects, we need to allocate memory to store the bits that describe them. Static memory allocation happens at compile time when we know in advance how much memory we need to use -- for instance, allocating an array of 16 integers. In contrast, dynamic memory allocation happens at runtime, when we can change the memory assigned to an object. This happens when we add new elements to a vector, for example.

- *What is the difference between new, malloc, and make_unique?*

    These are all ways of dynamically allocating memory.

    The <code>malloc</code> function is the classical way of allocating memory. You give it an input type and the amount of memory you want, and it will return a pointer to that memory. If allocation fails, malloc will return a null pointer. We can deallocate memory or reallocate it to a different object using <code>free</code> and <code>realloc</code>.

    The <code>new</code> operator also allocates memory, but it constructs objects, which malloc doesn't. You don't have to tell it how much memory you want; the compiler will figure it out for you. It also returns an object instead of a pointer, ensuring that the object at that memory location has the desired type. If allocation fails, new will throw an error. Due to these advantages, it's usually a good idea to use "new", but it can't add more memory to an existing buffer like realloc can. 

    However, smart pointers are even better.

- *What are some different kinds of smart pointers?*

    A smart pointer is used for dynamic memory allocation. By wrapping a pointer in a class, and writing a destructor that deletes the pointer, we can automatically deallocate memory for the pointer when it goes out of scope. There are various kinds of smart pointers, including unique pointers, shared pointers, and weak pointers.

    The <code>std::unique_ptr</code> stores a single pointer that points to an object. It is uniquely responsible for that object's memory management, as it deletes the object when the pointer goes out of scope. Thus, other pointers should not point to its object, because upon deletion they will point to a nonexistent object.

    By contrast, a <code>std::shared_ptr</code> allows several such pointers to point to the same object. They'll keep track of how many pointers point at the object, and the last pointer is responsible for deleting the object. 

    Finally, a <code>std::weak_ptr</code> is useful for solving the dangling pointer problem (checking whether a pointer points to an object that has already been deleted). A weak_pointer can tell whether the object has been deleted by calling
    <code>expired()</code>. Shared pointers can't do this because they only ever point to objects that haven't been deleted. Weak pointers cannot dereference to read the object themselves; they must access the object through a shared_ptr that's responsible for the object. They can create such a shared pointer by calling <code>lock()</code>. 

- *What is a template?*

    A template is a blueprint for creating generic functions or classes. Here generic programming just means that the program should work with many different types; we can create vectors containing ints or strings or other data types, so it would be nice if we could define a generic vector class that can hold any type of object. You can find the syntax rules for declaring a template in this [C++ tutorial](https://www.tutorialspoint.com/cplusplus/cpp_templates.htm). 

- *What is a mutex?*

    In multithreaded computing, many threads might concurrently try to run the same code. This can result in all sorts of errors (for instance, if a variable gets incremented concurrently), so we sometimes want to make sure that only one thread can run a piece of code at a time.

    A mutex is a way of avoiding such conflicts. It's like a key that a thread can use to access a piece of code; whichever thread holds the key can <code>lock()</code> access, and all of the other threads must wait until the <code>unlock()</code> before they can run.

    See the example code in the C++ [reference guide](https://cplusplus.com/reference/mutex/mutex/). 