---
layout: post
title: "Differential geometry"
subtitle: "Part 2: multilinear algebra"
tags: [math, geometry]
---

In college, I was pretty interested in learning about differential geometry and general relativity, but never found the time for it. Recently I started revisiting the subject, following the [lectures](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLFeEvEPtX_0S6vxxiiNPrJbLu9aK1UVC_) from the International Winter School on Gravity and Light. I'm writing mostly to clarify my own thoughts, trying to explain the main concepts as simply as I can, but maybe someone else will also find them interesting.

This post reviews some basic concepts about multilinear algebra and tensors.

## Basic linear algebra
Last time I began by mentioning that differential geometry is basically calculus on curvy shapes called manifolds. I then talked about manifolds, so now I should talk a little bit about calculus. The most basic idea in calculus is to approximate continuous (or smooth) functions using linear functions. Hopefully this is all review...

> **Definition.** Let $$V, W$$ be vector spaces over field $$F$$. A map $T: V \to W$ is *linear* if:
1. for all vectors $$u, v \in V$$, T(u + v) = T(u) + T(v)$$,
2. for all $$u \in V$$ and $$a \in F$$, $$T(av) = a T(v)$$.

Picking a *basis* for the vector spaces $$V, W$$ allows us to express linear maps between them concisely. To see this, let $$(v_i)_{i \in [n]}$$ and $$(w_j)_{j \in [m]}$$ be these bases respectively.

> **Definition.** Given vector space $$V$$, its *dual space* $$V^*$$ consists of linear maps $$T: V \to F$$. The elements of $$V^*$$ are called *dual vectors*, or *covectors*.

Dual basis. The $$i$$th dual vector is the map $$e^j: V \to F$$ given by $$e^j(e_i) = \delta_{ij}$$. (That is, it's the indicator that $$i=j$$.)

## Multiple vector spaces
